doc/md: declarative migration workflow docs (#1000)
ariga/atlas: doc/md/declarative/apply.mdx

---
id: apply
slug: /declarative/apply
title: Declarative schema migrations
---

import Help from '../generated/_atlas_schema_apply.mdx';

With Atlas, users do not need to plan database schema changes themselves. Instead

> of figuring our the correct SQL statements to get their database to the desired schema,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of figuring out the correct SQL statements to get their database to the desired state,
```

declarative schema migrations only require the user to provide the desired schema and
a connection string to the target database, and can get a migration plan that is tailor-made

> to the specific database engine they are working against.

Reviewer: This whole sentence is a little long. Break it up into two/three, something like: "Rather than figuring out the correct SQL statements to get their database to the desired state, declarative migrations offer a straightforward solution. With declarative migrations, the user is only required to provide the desired schema and a connection string to the target database. Atlas generates a tailor-made migration plan that is specific to the database engine the user is working against."

[Read more about declarative workflows](/concepts/declarative-vs-versioned)

### Auto-approval
Before executing the migration against the target database, Atlas will print the SQL

> queries that it is going to run and prompt the user for approval. Users that wish

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
statements that it is going to run and prompt the user for approval. Users that wish
```

to automatically approve may run the `schema apply` command with the `--auto-approve`
flag.

### Dry-runs
In order to skip the execution of the SQL queries against the target database,
users may provide the `--dry-run` flag. When invoked with this flag, Atlas will
connect to the target database, inspect its current state, calculate the diff

> between the provided desired schema and print out a series of SQL queries to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
between the provided desired schema and print out a series of SQL statements to
```

reconcile any gaps between the inspected and desired schemas.

### Dev-database
When storing schema definitions, many database engines perform some form of

> normalization. That is, despite us providing some specific definition of some

Reviewer: ```suggestion
normalization. That is, despite us providing a specific definition of some
```

aspect of the schema, the database will store it in another, equivalent form.

> This means in some situations it may appear to Atlas as if some diff exists

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means in certain situations it may appear to Atlas as if some diff exists
```

Reviewer: You wrote 'some' a lot, so I'm trying to change it up 😄

between the desired and inspected schemas, whereas in reality there is none.

To overcome these situations, users may use the `--dev-url` flag to provide

> Atlas with a connection string to a _Dev-Database_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Atlas with a connection string to a _Dev-Database_.
```

> that will be used to normalize the schema prior to planning migrations and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This database is used to normalize the schema prior to planning migrations and
```

for simulating changes to ensure their applicability before execution.

[Read more about Dev-Databases](/concepts/dev-database)

### Reference

> <Help/>

Reviewer 2: Please, let's keep the CLI reference on its page and mention/put a link for it here. 

I'd prefer to put here diagrams with examples and keep the document short than having this blob of text that probably will grow over time. 

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/7413593/182563126-34ed0c1f-8902-421a-93c4-50f600a9d175.png)
